_projects/preftils.md, before:

---
layout: project
title: "preftils - Android Preferences Utility"
date: 2024-05-11
categories: ["Android"]
programming-languages: ["Kotlin", "Java"]
icons: ["android", "kotlin", "java"]
last_modified_at: 2024-06-06
active: true
---

[pkg-url]: https://jitpack.io/#hubblecommand/preftils
[![Version Badge](https://jitpack.io/v/HubbleCommand/preftils.svg)][pkg-url]
[![Downloads Badge](https://jitpack.io/v/HubbleCommand/preftils/month.svg)][pkg-url]
[![License Badge](https://img.shields.io/github/license/HubbleCommand/preftils.svg?color=blue)](https://github.com/hubblecommand/preftils/blob/master/LICENSE)

preftils is self-described as a
  > Small helper library for working with Android SharedPreferences

## The problem
There were many things I worked on at my previous job as an Android Software Engineer. From taking over the integration of some of the company's advanced libraries to implementing novel features with standard practices, the job presented itself with a fair amount of interesting, dynamic, and fun challenges.

However what I didn't like was the growing feeling of futility as time went on. One of the biggest problems was dealing with an ever-increasing backlog of bugs, approaching the thousands in length for the Android app alone. The app had only existed for about 2 years before I joined the company, so I was astonished at the ballooning backlog, especially for features that were already in production and in customer's hands.

In many cases, certain parts of the code I had to fix had so many bugs and related tickets, and was so badly done, that it was more time-effective to throw the existing code in the trash and start over. Years of patchwork had made some elements so unstable that there wasn't always a choice in the matter, especially when fixing webs of spaghetti code where fixing one thing would break another. I was the first one to implement basic design patterns like [MVVM](https://developer.android.com/topic/libraries/architecture/viewmodel) or [re-use views](https://developer.android.com/develop/ui/views/layout/improving-layouts/reusing-layouts) instead of copy-pasting thousands upon thousands of lines of code, giving an idea of the immaturity of the codebase.

I spent a lot of time re-doing work, more than was reasonable, but it was still just a drop in the bucket of what should have been fixed or done well (note, not done better, done well). The cardinal sin of Android of excessive use of Context was probably the most common issue I had to weed out, and was a constant slowdown in my work.

There was, however, one monolithic class that always stuck out to me like a sore thumb; our Preferences class. Thousands upon thousands of lines of Java code to handle hundreds upon hundreds of preferences, not even talking about the dozens of related parser and conversion utility classes. While it wasn't difficult to work with, there was immense boilerplate just for handling different types and their getters and setters. I also didn't like the use of Pair to store keys & default values, as while it was obvious once you worked on it, was not evident. Code should generally be evident without the need of being familiar with the codebase. There was also the issue of many different pair types being used on accident, either from Android, Kotlin, or various libraries. It was a lot of code that never felt clean to work with, but there was never any time to review it or think of a better way due to a push for new features.

For me, it always seemed like a very thoughtless implementation with an excessive amount of code. The fundamental problem itself of managing SharedPreferences didn't seem that complex, yet we had so much code to handle it.

So, given I have some time, I decided to ponder upon the issue, and feel like I have come to a fairly simple solution.


## Implementation
My initial thought was that this was an ideal problem for generics: a bunch of functions that on `SharedPreferences`'s side were to either `get` or `put` data of different types. I had hated navigating through files to determine which type I should be using (nothing worse that using `getInt()` on  a `Long` & having runtime exceptions). What's the point of modern OOP & Intellisense if it isn't always used?

With Kotlin's [Extension functions](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/extensions.html) I could easily add the behavior I wanted to the corresponding `SharedPreferences` classes.

First of all, begone the use of Pair. Kotlin's `data class` and better generics are perfect for the task.

```data class Preference<T>(val key: String, val default: T)```

Next was making `SharedPreferences`'s `get` and `put` work with this data class. I wanted these functions to be as light as possible, so I made them `inline` to reduce the overhead compared to the HOF equivalent (details in the first paragraph [of the documentation](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/inline-functions.html)). As I still need access to the associated classes for type checking, I also added the [`reified`](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/inline-functions.html#reified-type-parameters) keyword to [avoid type erasure](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/inline-functions.html#reified-type-parameters).

```
inline fun <reified T> SharedPreferences.get(preference: Preference<T>): T {
    return when (preference.default) {
        is String -> this.getString(preference.key, preference.default) as T
        is Int -> this.getInt(preference.key, preference.default) as T
        is Long -> this.getLong(preference.key, preference.default) as T
        is Boolean -> this.getBoolean(preference.key, preference.default) as T
        is Float -> this.getFloat(preference.key, preference.default) as T
        else -> throw IllegalArgumentException("Unsupported type")
    }
}
```

As this is a pure Kotlin library, Java support was secondary. However, simply removing the `inline` and `reified` keywords lets this work in Java (although with warnings of unchecked casts due to type erasure).

> After some investigation, the performance difference between `inlining` or not is negligible. It will be removed in a later update to allow for Java interoperability.

While this was nice, there was a major case that I hadn't covered: custom classes. As it stood, if anything besides a `String`, `Int`, `Long`, `Boolean`, or `Float`, it would throw an `IllegalArgumentException`. This was ignoring a fair amount of the original problem of multiple different parsing functions for the same classes (although there were certainly cleaner ways to do that as well).

Enter support for serialization. Continue reading below.

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Collapsed section on removed features<blockquote>This collapsed section was written for v1.1.0, which introduced the <code>ICodable</code> interface for serializing custom classes, which is no longer available in favor of official Kotlin and Java serialization language features</blockquote></summary>

Enter `ICodable`:

```
interface ICodable {
    fun encode(): String

    @Throws
    fun decode(string: String): ICodable
}
```

Taking it's name from [Swift](https://www.swift.org/)'s [Codable](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swift/codable), the `ICodable` interface makes inheriting classes implement both a way to encode itself into a string, and decode itself from a string.
While I would have prefered a static way to do this without the need for an instance of the class, the problem is that in Kotliin, this would mean that classes inheriting from `ICodable` would not be required to implement the `decode()` method. I guess I could have gone the [Factory Pattern](https://refactoring.guru/design-patterns/factory-method) or another creation pattern route, but the purpose of this library was to make things *simple*, so not wanting to add any additional complexity, I left it as is.

The get function now has :

```
inline fun <reified T> SharedPreferences.get(preference: Preference<T>): T {
    return when (preference.default) {
        ...
        is ICodable -> {
            val str = this.getString(preference.key, null) ?: return preference.default
            preference.default.decode(str) as T
        }
        else -> throw IllegalArgumentException("Unsupported type")
    }
}
```

It is now exceedingly easy to manage `SharedPreferences`. Using a single `object` to hold the preferences:

```
object Preferences {
    val PREF = Preference("pref", 1000L)
}
```

and as simple as doing the following to read and write the preference:
```
var pref: Long = SharedPreferences.get(Preferences.PREF)
with (PreferenceManager.getDefaultSharedPreferences(this).edit()) {
    put(Preferences.PREF, 100L)
    apply()
}
```

> I have done some more investigation, and it appears that I could use [`kotlinx-serialization`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/) instead of `ICodable`.
> One thing that I don't like about `kotlinx-serialization` is that I would have to [force a format](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/serialization.html#formats), i.e. JSON, or would have to pass in the actual serialization lambda, which I guess could work.

> The current system will be kept, and an additional class will be created to facilitate the usage of Kotlin's Serialization with `SharedPreferences`. This package is called Preftils, plural.
> This also sort of takes the fun out of the Generics, as there is no point as many [Primitives](https://github.com/Kotlin/kotlinx.serialization/blob/master/docs/builtin-classes.md#primitives) are supported, although it would still help with type safety.
> The last downside would be any interoperability with Java.

> The following seems to work well
```
inline fun <reified T> SharedPreferences.getSerializable(preference: Preference<T>): T {
    if (preference.default is Serializable) {
        val str = this.getString(preference.key, null) ?: return preference.default
        return Json.decodeFromString<T>(str)
    }
    throw IllegalArgumentException("Unsupported type")
}
```

> I will update this page with a new section once this is done
</details>


## Adding Kotlin [Serialization](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/serialization.html) support

The biggest blocker was the following warning on the `@Serialization` annotation:

`"kotlinx.serialization compiler plugin is not applied to the module, so this annotation would not be processed. Make sure that you've setup your buildscript correctly and re-import project."`

I had followed everything to a T, and couldn't for the life of me figure out what was wrong.
After a few hours of searching, I was completely lost. I had applied the necessary plugins and imported the necessary dependencies.

I eventually stumbled upon [this GitHub issue](https://github.com/Kotlin/kotlinx.serialization/issues/2508). I was using Android Studio Giraffe 2022.3.1 patch 2, but there was a newer version available, Android Studio Jellyfish 2023.3.1 patch 1. After upgrading Android Studio, the warning dissapeared, and everything works.

I should probably go over [what's new in Android Studio](https://developer.android.com/studio/releases?utm_source=android-studio&utm_medium=studio-assistant), but I can't be bothere ATM. Although I should probably address the [`Windows Defender might be impacting your build performance` warning](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/57202043/windows-defender-might-be-impacting-your-build-performance).


## Adding Java support
Instead of trying to force the Kotlin to code to work with Java, I've decided to write the Java equivalent.

Java serialization works differently, using [inheritence](https://docs.oracle.com/javase%2Ftutorial%2F/java/IandI/subclasses.html) with the [Serializable interface](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/io/Serializable.html) similar to the `ICodable` I originally made, instead of doing it with [Annotations](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/annotations.html) like in Kotlin. I find this approach superior, as it is easy to test if a type is serializable or not. In Kotlin, you always run the risk of runtime errors with no compile-time support (in this case, the support is lost due to the use of generics), yet in Java, you cannot even compile if the type does not conform to the `Serializable` interface.

It was also a chance to look into some of the newer features of Java, notably the better [pattern matching of Java 21](https://blogs.oracle.com/javamagazine/post/java-pattern-matching-switch-preview). This would mean an end to long `if-if-else` blocks to handle different types. I ended up with the following:
<details markdown="1">
<summary>Java code using switch patterns on types</summary>

```
public class PreferenceUtils {
    static <T> void set(SharedPreferences.Editor editor, Preference<T> preference, T value) throws IOException {
        switch (value) {
            case Integer i -> editor.putInt(preference.getKey(), i);
            case Long l -> editor.putLong(preference.getKey(), l);
            case Float f -> editor.putFloat(preference.getKey(), f);
            case Boolean b -> editor.putBoolean(preference.getKey(), b);
            case String s -> editor.putString(preference.getKey(), s);
            case java.io.Serializable serializable -> {
                ByteArrayOutputStream outStream = new ByteArrayOutputStream();
                ObjectOutputStream out = new ObjectOutputStream(outStream);
                out.writeObject(serializable);
                out.flush();
                out.close();

                editor.putString(preference.getKey(), outStream.toString());
                outStream.flush();
                outStream.close();
            }
            default -> throw new IllegalArgumentException("Unsupported type: " + preference.getDefault().getClass());
        }
    }

    @SuppressWarnings("unchecked")
    static <T> T get(SharedPreferences preferences, Preference<T> preference) throws IOException, ClassNotFoundException {
        return preference.getDefault();
        return switch (preference.getDefault()) {
            case Integer i -> (T) (Integer) preferences.getInt(preference.getKey(), i);
            case Long l -> (T) (Long) preferences.getLong(preference.getKey(), l);
            case Float f -> (T) (Float) preferences.getFloat(preference.getKey(), f);
            case Boolean b -> (T) (Boolean) preferences.getBoolean(preference.getKey(), b);
            case String s -> (T) preferences.getString(preference.getKey(), s);
            case java.io.Serializable ignored -> {
                String string = preferences.getString(preference.getKey(), null);
                if (string == null) {
                    yield preference.getDefault();
                }

                ByteArrayInputStream inStream = new ByteArrayInputStream(string.getBytes());
                ObjectInputStream in = new ObjectInputStream(inStream);

                T object = (T) in.readObject();
                inStream.close();
                in.close();

                yield object;
            }
            default -> throw new IllegalArgumentException("Unsupported type: " + preference.getDefault().getClass());
        };
    }
}
```

</details>

Clean and succinct. However, I kept getting the following compilation error:
`com.sun.tools.javac.code.Symbol$CompletionFailure: class file for java.lang.runtime.SwitchBootstraps not found`

After a bit of searching I found [this](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=36282076), which is a neat read, but doesn't help. I tried with JDK 21.0.1 and 22.0.1, Oracle JDK and Microsoft's OpenJDK, but nothing seemed to work. As I had already wasted enough time with integrating Kotlin Serialization support, I wasn't going to try and fix this just to keep my own code tidy. I submitted a bug report, but for now, I'm going to stick to Java 8.


## Publishing to JitPack
Another quasi-issue at my previous job was how we managed Android modules. Given the size of the app, we should have had more than one module, but we only had one to manage a library that another team had done. The module was in another repo, and was imported as a submodule.

While that solution wouldn't scale amazingly, that module was never inteded for anything else other than our app. The same approach wouldn't work for Preftils, as this was supposed to be easily used by any third party, ideally just by adding it as a dependency in a `build.gradle` or `build.gradle.kts`.

I originally looked into adding it [directly to Maven central](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/space/publish-artifacts-to-maven-central.html), but after seeing the process I wanted to see if there was something more streamlined.

Enter [JitPack](https://jitpack.io/), self-described as
> Easy to use package repository for Git

> Publish your JVM and Android libraries

Seemed good enough for me: upload my repo to GitHub, and have JitPack build & serve my versions.

The process was fairly simple: 
- create a JitPack account and link it to my GitHub
- create an Android module
- publish the module to a public repository on my GitHub
- create a new release of the repo

Things didn't work at first, so I fiddled with settings in by gradle & `jitpack.yml` until I couldn't figure out why JitPack kept failing to build. I ended up having to peruse tutorials for a fix, and stumbled upon [Mike's Code](https://www.youtube.com/@Mikes-Code)'s video on [publishing to JitPack](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6XugK4Sin6w). The answer was kind of un-intuitive, which was that the module had to exist within an Android project. After moving the module into a project & uploading the whole thing to GitHub, the first release built without a hitch.

Commit message:

preftils why jdk21 didnt work
Because Android only supports up to 17, duh

_projects/preftils.md, after:

---
layout: project
title: "preftils - Android Preferences Utility"
date: 2024-05-11
categories: ["Android"]
programming-languages: ["Kotlin", "Java"]
icons: ["android", "kotlin", "java"]
last_modified_at: 2024-09-05
active: true
---

[pkg-url]: https://jitpack.io/#hubblecommand/preftils
[![Version Badge](https://jitpack.io/v/HubbleCommand/preftils.svg)][pkg-url]
[![Downloads Badge](https://jitpack.io/v/HubbleCommand/preftils/month.svg)][pkg-url]
[![License Badge](https://img.shields.io/github/license/HubbleCommand/preftils.svg?color=blue)](https://github.com/hubblecommand/preftils/blob/master/LICENSE)

preftils is self-described as a
  > Small helper library for working with Android SharedPreferences

## The problem
There were many things I worked on at my previous job as an Android Software Engineer. From taking over the integration of some of the company's advanced libraries to implementing novel features with standard practices, the job presented itself with a fair amount of interesting, dynamic, and fun challenges.

However what I didn't like was the growing feeling of futility as time went on. One of the biggest problems was dealing with an ever-increasing backlog of bugs, approaching the thousands in length for the Android app alone. The app had only existed for about 2 years before I joined the company, so I was astonished at the ballooning backlog, especially for features that were already in production and in customer's hands.

In many cases, certain parts of the code I had to fix had so many bugs and related tickets, and was so badly done, that it was more time-effective to throw the existing code in the trash and start over. Years of patchwork had made some elements so unstable that there wasn't always a choice in the matter, especially when fixing webs of spaghetti code where fixing one thing would break another. I was the first one to implement basic design patterns like [MVVM](https://developer.android.com/topic/libraries/architecture/viewmodel) or [re-use views](https://developer.android.com/develop/ui/views/layout/improving-layouts/reusing-layouts) instead of copy-pasting thousands upon thousands of lines of code, giving an idea of the immaturity of the codebase.

I spent a lot of time re-doing work, more than was reasonable, but it was still just a drop in the bucket of what should have been fixed or done well (note, not done better, done well). The cardinal sin of Android of excessive use of Context was probably the most common issue I had to weed out, and was a constant slowdown in my work.

There was, however, one monolithic class that always stuck out to me like a sore thumb; our Preferences class. Thousands upon thousands of lines of Java code to handle hundreds upon hundreds of preferences, not even talking about the dozens of related parser and conversion utility classes. While it wasn't difficult to work with, there was immense boilerplate just for handling different types and their getters and setters. I also didn't like the use of Pair to store keys & default values, as while it was obvious once you worked on it, was not evident. Code should generally be evident without the need of being familiar with the codebase. There was also the issue of many different pair types being used on accident, either from Android, Kotlin, or various libraries. It was a lot of code that never felt clean to work with, but there was never any time to review it or think of a better way due to a push for new features.

For me, it always seemed like a very thoughtless implementation with an excessive amount of code. The fundamental problem itself of managing SharedPreferences didn't seem that complex, yet we had so much code to handle it.

So, given I have some time, I decided to ponder upon the issue, and feel like I have come to a fairly simple solution.


## Implementation
My initial thought was that this was an ideal problem for generics: a bunch of functions that on `SharedPreferences`'s side were to either `get` or `put` data of different types. I had hated navigating through files to determine which type I should be using (nothing worse that using `getInt()` on  a `Long` & having runtime exceptions). What's the point of modern OOP & Intellisense if it isn't always used?

With Kotlin's [Extension functions](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/extensions.html) I could easily add the behavior I wanted to the corresponding `SharedPreferences` classes.

First of all, begone the use of Pair. Kotlin's `data class` and better generics are perfect for the task.

```data class Preference<T>(val key: String, val default: T)```

Next was making `SharedPreferences`'s `get` and `put` work with this data class. I wanted these functions to be as light as possible, so I made them `inline` to reduce the overhead compared to the HOF equivalent (details in the first paragraph [of the documentation](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/inline-functions.html)). As I still need access to the associated classes for type checking, I also added the [`reified`](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/inline-functions.html#reified-type-parameters) keyword to [avoid type erasure](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/inline-functions.html#reified-type-parameters).

```
inline fun <reified T> SharedPreferences.get(preference: Preference<T>): T {
    return when (preference.default) {
        is String -> this.getString(preference.key, preference.default) as T
        is Int -> this.getInt(preference.key, preference.default) as T
        is Long -> this.getLong(preference.key, preference.default) as T
        is Boolean -> this.getBoolean(preference.key, preference.default) as T
        is Float -> this.getFloat(preference.key, preference.default) as T
        else -> throw IllegalArgumentException("Unsupported type")
    }
}
```

As this is a pure Kotlin library, Java support was secondary. However, simply removing the `inline` and `reified` keywords lets this work in Java (although with warnings of unchecked casts due to type erasure).

> After some investigation, the performance difference between `inlining` or not is negligible. It will be removed in a later update to allow for Java interoperability.

While this was nice, there was a major case that I hadn't covered: custom classes. As it stood, if anything besides a `String`, `Int`, `Long`, `Boolean`, or `Float`, it would throw an `IllegalArgumentException`. This was ignoring a fair amount of the original problem of multiple different parsing functions for the same classes (although there were certainly cleaner ways to do that as well).

Enter support for serialization. Continue reading below.

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Collapsed section on removed features<blockquote>This collapsed section was written for v1.1.0, which introduced the <code>ICodable</code> interface for serializing custom classes, which is no longer available in favor of official Kotlin and Java serialization language features</blockquote></summary>

Enter `ICodable`:

```
interface ICodable {
    fun encode(): String

    @Throws
    fun decode(string: String): ICodable
}
```

Taking it's name from [Swift](https://www.swift.org/)'s [Codable](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swift/codable), the `ICodable` interface makes inheriting classes implement both a way to encode itself into a string, and decode itself from a string.
While I would have prefered a static way to do this without the need for an instance of the class, the problem is that in Kotliin, this would mean that classes inheriting from `ICodable` would not be required to implement the `decode()` method. I guess I could have gone the [Factory Pattern](https://refactoring.guru/design-patterns/factory-method) or another creation pattern route, but the purpose of this library was to make things *simple*, so not wanting to add any additional complexity, I left it as is.

The get function now has :

```
inline fun <reified T> SharedPreferences.get(preference: Preference<T>): T {
    return when (preference.default) {
        ...
        is ICodable -> {
            val str = this.getString(preference.key, null) ?: return preference.default
            preference.default.decode(str) as T
        }
        else -> throw IllegalArgumentException("Unsupported type")
    }
}
```

It is now exceedingly easy to manage `SharedPreferences`. Using a single `object` to hold the preferences:

```
object Preferences {
    val PREF = Preference("pref", 1000L)
}
```

and as simple as doing the following to read and write the preference:
```
var pref: Long = SharedPreferences.get(Preferences.PREF)
with (PreferenceManager.getDefaultSharedPreferences(this).edit()) {
    put(Preferences.PREF, 100L)
    apply()
}
```

> I have done some more investigation, and it appears that I could use [`kotlinx-serialization`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/) instead of `ICodable`.
> One thing that I don't like about `kotlinx-serialization` is that I would have to [force a format](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/serialization.html#formats), i.e. JSON, or would have to pass in the actual serialization lambda, which I guess could work.

> The current system will be kept, and an additional class will be created to facilitate the usage of Kotlin's Serialization with `SharedPreferences`. This package is called Preftils, plural.
> This also sort of takes the fun out of the Generics, as there is no point as many [Primitives](https://github.com/Kotlin/kotlinx.serialization/blob/master/docs/builtin-classes.md#primitives) are supported, although it would still help with type safety.
> The last downside would be any interoperability with Java.

> The following seems to work well
```
inline fun <reified T> SharedPreferences.getSerializable(preference: Preference<T>): T {
    if (preference.default is Serializable) {
        val str = this.getString(preference.key, null) ?: return preference.default
        return Json.decodeFromString<T>(str)
    }
    throw IllegalArgumentException("Unsupported type")
}
```

> I will update this page with a new section once this is done
</details>


## Adding Kotlin [Serialization](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/serialization.html) support

The biggest blocker was the following warning on the `@Serialization` annotation:

`"kotlinx.serialization compiler plugin is not applied to the module, so this annotation would not be processed. Make sure that you've setup your buildscript correctly and re-import project."`

I had followed everything to a T, and couldn't for the life of me figure out what was wrong.
After a few hours of searching, I was completely lost. I had applied the necessary plugins and imported the necessary dependencies.

I eventually stumbled upon [this GitHub issue](https://github.com/Kotlin/kotlinx.serialization/issues/2508). I was using Android Studio Giraffe 2022.3.1 patch 2, but there was a newer version available, Android Studio Jellyfish 2023.3.1 patch 1. After upgrading Android Studio, the warning dissapeared, and everything works.

I should probably go over [what's new in Android Studio](https://developer.android.com/studio/releases?utm_source=android-studio&utm_medium=studio-assistant), but I can't be bothere ATM. Although I should probably address the [`Windows Defender might be impacting your build performance` warning](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/57202043/windows-defender-might-be-impacting-your-build-performance).


## Adding Java support
> By complete chance, I found why the Java21 stuff didn't work, and I can't believe that I hadn't even noticed the very obvious: Android does it's own compatability with the JVM, and currently only supports up to version 17. So obviously using Java 21 APIs wouldn't work! Dadoi!

Instead of trying to force the Kotlin to code to work with Java, I've decided to write the Java equivalent.

Java serialization works differently, using [inheritence](https://docs.oracle.com/javase%2Ftutorial%2F/java/IandI/subclasses.html) with the [Serializable interface](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/io/Serializable.html) similar to the `ICodable` I originally made, instead of doing it with [Annotations](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/annotations.html) like in Kotlin. I find this approach superior, as it is easy to test if a type is serializable or not. In Kotlin, you always run the risk of runtime errors with no compile-time support (in this case, the support is lost due to the use of generics), yet in Java, you cannot even compile if the type does not conform to the `Serializable` interface.

It was also a chance to look into some of the newer features of Java, notably the better [pattern matching of Java 21](https://blogs.oracle.com/javamagazine/post/java-pattern-matching-switch-preview). This would mean an end to long `if-if-else` blocks to handle different types. I ended up with the following:
<details markdown="1">
<summary>Java code using switch patterns on types</summary>

```
public class PreferenceUtils {
    static <T> void set(SharedPreferences.Editor editor, Preference<T> preference, T value) throws IOException {
        switch (value) {
            case Integer i -> editor.putInt(preference.getKey(), i);
            case Long l -> editor.putLong(preference.getKey(), l);
            case Float f -> editor.putFloat(preference.getKey(), f);
            case Boolean b -> editor.putBoolean(preference.getKey(), b);
            case String s -> editor.putString(preference.getKey(), s);
            case java.io.Serializable serializable -> {
                ByteArrayOutputStream outStream = new ByteArrayOutputStream();
                ObjectOutputStream out = new ObjectOutputStream(outStream);
                out.writeObject(serializable);
                out.flush();
                out.close();

                editor.putString(preference.getKey(), outStream.toString());
                outStream.flush();
                outStream.close();
            }
            default -> throw new IllegalArgumentException("Unsupported type: " + preference.getDefault().getClass());
        }
    }

    @SuppressWarnings("unchecked")
    static <T> T get(SharedPreferences preferences, Preference<T> preference) throws IOException, ClassNotFoundException {
        return preference.getDefault();
        return switch (preference.getDefault()) {
            case Integer i -> (T) (Integer) preferences.getInt(preference.getKey(), i);
            case Long l -> (T) (Long) preferences.getLong(preference.getKey(), l);
            case Float f -> (T) (Float) preferences.getFloat(preference.getKey(), f);
            case Boolean b -> (T) (Boolean) preferences.getBoolean(preference.getKey(), b);
            case String s -> (T) preferences.getString(preference.getKey(), s);
            case java.io.Serializable ignored -> {
                String string = preferences.getString(preference.getKey(), null);
                if (string == null) {
                    yield preference.getDefault();
                }

                ByteArrayInputStream inStream = new ByteArrayInputStream(string.getBytes());
                ObjectInputStream in = new ObjectInputStream(inStream);

                T object = (T) in.readObject();
                inStream.close();
                in.close();

                yield object;
            }
            default -> throw new IllegalArgumentException("Unsupported type: " + preference.getDefault().getClass());
        };
    }
}
```

</details>

Clean and succinct. However, I kept getting the following compilation error:
`com.sun.tools.javac.code.Symbol$CompletionFailure: class file for java.lang.runtime.SwitchBootstraps not found`

After a bit of searching I found [this](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=36282076), which is a neat read, but doesn't help. I tried with JDK 21.0.1 and 22.0.1, Oracle JDK and Microsoft's OpenJDK, but nothing seemed to work. As I had already wasted enough time with integrating Kotlin Serialization support, I wasn't going to try and fix this just to keep my own code tidy. I submitted a bug report, but for now, I'm going to stick to Java 8.


## Publishing to JitPack
Another quasi-issue at my previous job was how we managed Android modules. Given the size of the app, we should have had more than one module, but we only had one to manage a library that another team had done. The module was in another repo, and was imported as a submodule.

While that solution wouldn't scale amazingly, that module was never inteded for anything else other than our app. The same approach wouldn't work for Preftils, as this was supposed to be easily used by any third party, ideally just by adding it as a dependency in a `build.gradle` or `build.gradle.kts`.

I originally looked into adding it [directly to Maven central](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/space/publish-artifacts-to-maven-central.html), but after seeing the process I wanted to see if there was something more streamlined.

Enter [JitPack](https://jitpack.io/), self-described as
> Easy to use package repository for Git

> Publish your JVM and Android libraries

Seemed good enough for me: upload my repo to GitHub, and have JitPack build & serve my versions.

The process was fairly simple: 
- create a JitPack account and link it to my GitHub
- create an Android module
- publish the module to a public repository on my GitHub
- create a new release of the repo

Things didn't work at first, so I fiddled with settings in by gradle & `jitpack.yml` until I couldn't figure out why JitPack kept failing to build. I ended up having to peruse tutorials for a fix, and stumbled upon [Mike's Code](https://www.youtube.com/@Mikes-Code)'s video on [publishing to JitPack](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6XugK4Sin6w). The answer was kind of un-intuitive, which was that the module had to exist within an Android project. After moving the module into a project & uploading the whole thing to GitHub, the first release built without a hitch.
