_projects/godot/directional-sprites.md, before:

---
layout      : project
title       : "Godot - Directional Sprites"
date        : 2024-07-20
categories  : ["GameDev", "Godot"]
#start-date  : 
---


I really liked the game [BoltGun](https://www.focus-entmt.com/en/games/warhammer-40000-boltgun); a pixel retro look with modern lighting, effects, and framerate.

I stumbled upon [this cool video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v6hg7fYSw8I), and was intruiged as to how it was implemented.


## Implementation
The starting point is the existing Sprite types to ensure an easy interoperability with GOdot's existing systems.
[SpriteBase3D](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/classes/class_spritebase3d.html) is the base class of the two 3D sprite types:
[Sprite3D](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/classes/class_sprite3d.html)
and
[AnimatedSprite3D](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/classes/class_animatedsprite3d.html)
. The 2 2D Sprite types,
[Sprite2D](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/classes/class_sprite2d.html)
and
[AnimatedSprite2D](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/classes/class_animatedsprite2d.html)
, however, both inherit directly from
[Node2D](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/classes/class_node2d.html)
.

### Using Cameras
The most basic implementation would do something like checking the rotation of the Sprite to a target camera, then changing the sprite based on that.
However, this doesn't work great: if there are multiple cameras (i.e. mirrors, portals, camera systems), then only one could ever be correct.
This especially won't work very well in a multiplayer environment: you can determine the local player's camera, but would create some very tight coupling between every entity and the player. I hate coupling things that don't need to, so I wanted to avoid this solution at all costs.

Here are some resources I found that do just that:
- [Slimebuck's 8Directional](https://github.com/slimebuck/Slimebucks-Godot-8Directional-Example)
- [Calham 8DirectionalSpriteIn3D](https://github.com/calham-21/8DirectionalSpriteIn3DDemo)
- [Reddit post with the camera solution](https://www.reddit.com/r/godot/comments/19bvu0l/testing_8directional_sprites_in_3d_thoughts/)
- [Wizardscrool Studio solution](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8p0UFkQhJ_M&ab_channel=WizardscrollStudio)
- [Miziziziz solution](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q0sLPbyIbQg&ab_channel=Miziziziz)
- [Eddie Studio solution](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tAElk1WnYn8&ab_channel=Eddie)
- [Gamedev Aki solution](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NZ7EP1Kt_sI&ab_channel=GamedevAki)

A more interesting and novel approach using [AnimationTree from Jon Topielski](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xf2RduncoNU).


### Using Shaders
As I really wanted to avoid doing anything like that, I didn't.
Ideally, I wanted a solution that would work regardless of camera: some way to make it so that every camera would do the same thing when looking at this node.
I started looking into the C++ implementations of the 3D sprite classes, but realized that it would take a lot of time to get something working, and was about to give up due to time constraints.

Then, I stumbled upon [this Godot proposal](https://github.com/godotengine/godot-proposals/discussions/5082).
Someone suggested a shader, and I realized what a fool I was for not realizing that myself: it's exactly the way to get each camera to get the correct representation!

I don't feel to bad for using as a starting point.
There was a LOT more to add, and many issues to fix, but after a while I got it working with Godot's existing Sprite3D node parameters.

### Going back to 2D
Ironically, getting directional sprites in 2D is much more painful.

The shader itself took a bit longer as I did it from scratch.

However, I realized I had a problem once I looked into 2D lighting. 
2D lighting doesn't work the same at all as in 3D, and requires [LightOccluder2D](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/classes/class_lightoccluder2d.html) nodes.
This means that the shader approach won't really work, unfortunately.

Commit message:

directional sprites note on rads vs degrees

_projects/godot/directional-sprites.md, after:

---
layout      : project
title       : "Godot - Directional Sprites"
date        : 2024-07-20
categories  : ["GameDev", "Godot"]
#start-date  : 
---


I really liked the game [BoltGun](https://www.focus-entmt.com/en/games/warhammer-40000-boltgun); a pixel retro look with modern lighting, effects, and framerate.

I stumbled upon [this cool video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v6hg7fYSw8I), and was intruiged as to how it was implemented.


## Implementation
The starting point is the existing Sprite types to ensure an easy interoperability with GOdot's existing systems.
[SpriteBase3D](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/classes/class_spritebase3d.html) is the base class of the two 3D sprite types:
[Sprite3D](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/classes/class_sprite3d.html)
and
[AnimatedSprite3D](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/classes/class_animatedsprite3d.html)
. The 2 2D Sprite types,
[Sprite2D](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/classes/class_sprite2d.html)
and
[AnimatedSprite2D](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/classes/class_animatedsprite2d.html)
, however, both inherit directly from
[Node2D](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/classes/class_node2d.html)
.

### Using Cameras
The most basic implementation would do something like checking the rotation of the Sprite to a target camera, then changing the sprite based on that.
However, this doesn't work great: if there are multiple cameras (i.e. mirrors, portals, camera systems), then only one could ever be correct.
This especially won't work very well in a multiplayer environment: you can determine the local player's camera, but would create some very tight coupling between every entity and the player. I hate coupling things that don't need to, so I wanted to avoid this solution at all costs.

Here are some resources I found that do just that:
- [Slimebuck's 8Directional](https://github.com/slimebuck/Slimebucks-Godot-8Directional-Example)
- [Calham 8DirectionalSpriteIn3D](https://github.com/calham-21/8DirectionalSpriteIn3DDemo)
- [Reddit post with the camera solution](https://www.reddit.com/r/godot/comments/19bvu0l/testing_8directional_sprites_in_3d_thoughts/)
- [Wizardscrool Studio solution](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8p0UFkQhJ_M&ab_channel=WizardscrollStudio)
- [Miziziziz solution](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q0sLPbyIbQg&ab_channel=Miziziziz)
- [Eddie Studio solution](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tAElk1WnYn8&ab_channel=Eddie)
- [Gamedev Aki solution](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NZ7EP1Kt_sI&ab_channel=GamedevAki)

A more interesting and novel approach using [AnimationTree from Jon Topielski](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xf2RduncoNU).


### Using Shaders
As I really wanted to avoid doing anything like that, I didn't.
Ideally, I wanted a solution that would work regardless of camera: some way to make it so that every camera would do the same thing when looking at this node.
I started looking into the C++ implementations of the 3D sprite classes, but realized that it would take a lot of time to get something working, and was about to give up due to time constraints.

Then, I stumbled upon [this Godot proposal](https://github.com/godotengine/godot-proposals/discussions/5082).
Someone suggested a shader, and I realized what a fool I was for not realizing that myself: it's exactly the way to get each camera to get the correct representation!

I don't feel to bad for using as a starting point.
There was a LOT more to add, and many issues to fix, but after a while I got it working with Godot's existing Sprite3D node parameters.

### Funny issue with rads
Radians are usually the go-to when dealing with angles.

However, in my case, I had to use degrees. Not out of preference, but out of necessity. When using radians, there would be flickers between frames close to the angular "borders".

My guess is that due to the successive divisions with floats, that precision loss was the issue with the small fractional values that are intrinsic with radians.
Degrees, on the other hand, have a much greater range at two degrees of magnitude larger.

### Going back to 2D
Ironically, getting directional sprites in 2D is much more painful.

The shader itself took a bit longer as I did it from scratch.

However, I realized I had a problem once I looked into 2D lighting. 
2D lighting doesn't work the same at all as in 3D, and requires [LightOccluder2D](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/classes/class_lightoccluder2d.html) nodes.
This means that the shader approach won't really work, unfortunately.
