_projects/godot/tips-and-tricks.md, before:

---
layout      : project
title       : "Godot - Tips & Tricks"
date        : 2024-07-30
categories  : ["GameDev", "Godot"]
icons: ["godot", "c++"]
---



This is an assortment of tips and tricks that I've collected...



## Handling multiple resolutions
An easy way to do this is to not actually support multiple resolutions.

go into Project Settings, and under Display/Window, set Stretch Mode to Canvas Items or Viewport.

The full documentation can be read [here](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/rendering/multiple_resolutions.html)


## Physics
### [Physics Layers and Masks](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/4.3/tutorials/physics/physics_introduction.html#collision-layers-and-masks)
This is an incredibly powerful system.

To summarize:
- Layer: where the entity exists
- Mask: where the entity scans

### Detect overlap without colliding
[Check this post](https://forum.godotengine.org/t/how-to-not-collide-physically-but-still-detect-collision/15648/2)

You can't just use raw physics bodies : no amount of masking and layering fenagling will work.
If RigidBodies or CharacterBodies are on the same mask / layer, they will collide.
You will need an Area node to detect overlap.

### 2D floating physics for CharacterBody
May not be the most obvious thing, but 2D physics actually has two modes: top-down / orthographic and side

If you have a on-side game, you should use grounded Motion Mode on your

If you have a top-down game, you should use floating
If you don't do this, your CharacterBodies may get stuck on each other


## Patterns
### Movement effect zones for CharacterBody

Godot's damping functionalities are a little strange.
The documentation isn't clear, and you mostly have to go about it with trial and error to find appropriate damping values.
Some people do have [other implementations](https://www.reddit.com/r/godot/comments/rtss7u/a_function_for_calculating_rigidbody2d_damping/), and there are [discussions on the topic](https://github.com/godotengine/godot-proposals/discussions/9315), but unless you have some major constraint, it's better to work with what you've got.

According to the documentation for CharacterBody2D: ["They are not affected by physics at all, but they affect other physics bodies in their path"](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/classes/class_characterbody2d.html).
This may entice people to use RigidBodies, which are much harder to deal with.
However, I'm generally not a fan of RigidBodies: full physics where you generally do not need it and a lot more work.

A very easy solution is to still use Area2Ds : make sure to check the [docs](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/classes/class_area2d.html) and the [tutorial](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/physics/using_area_2d.html).

Usually, when working with `CharacterBody2D`s, you will have an attached script with a defined speed variable that the character moves at.
For example, take the code below:

```
extends CharacterBody2D

@export var speed = 300.0

func _physics_process(delta: float) -> void:
	var input_direction = Input.get_vector("left", "right", "up", "down")
	velocity = input_direction * speed

	move_and_slide()
```

This is very simple: modify the `velocity` property of the `CharacterBody2D`, which is used by the `move_and_slide()` function to move the character.

However, we're not going to rely solely on CharacterBody2D here.
As described above in [Detect overlap without colliding](#Detect overlap without colliding), we will need an `Area2D` node attached to our character to detect other Area2Ds.
This is because `CharacterBody2D` does not have the same signals available as something like `RigidBody2D`, notably `body_shape_entered` and `body_shape_exited`.

Attach an `Area2D` node with the desired `CollisionShape2D`. You should have the following structure:

	CharacterBody2D
	├── CollisionShape2D
	└── Area2D
		└── CollisionShape2D



Then, connect the `area_entered` and `area_exited` signals of the `Area2D` node to your `CharacterBody2D` script, and add the following code:

```
func _on_area_2d_area_entered(area: Area2D) -> void:
	if area.linear_damp:
		speed *= 1 - (area.linear_damp / 100)

func _on_area_2d_area_exited(area: Area2D) -> void:
	if area.linear_damp:
		speed = speed / (1 - (area.linear_damp / 100))
```

Now, whenever your character enters an `Area2D` with a `linear_damp` space override, your character will slow down (and return to it's normal speed when it exits).

You can do something almost identical for angular damp and gravity overrides

#### Limitations
This doesn't take into consideration the Space Override type, and behaves like Combine.
However, it would be easy to have a map, where the Key is the RID of the Area2Ds that are currently in, to then 

I will not be going that far though, as my use case doesn't have such requirements.

There will most likely lead to floating-point errors in the long run.
The previous suggestion to use a Map of effects could be combined with a base speed variable.
Then, whenever an area is added or removed, the base speed would have all the multipliers applied.


## Modifiers

Commit message:

godot physics tats & dot effects

_projects/godot/tips-and-tricks.md, after:

---
layout      : project
title       : "Godot - Tips & Tricks"
date        : 2024-07-30
categories  : ["GameDev", "Godot"]
icons: ["godot", "c++"]
---



This is an assortment of tips and tricks that I've collected...



## Handling multiple resolutions
An easy way to do this is to not actually support multiple resolutions.

go into Project Settings, and under Display/Window, set Stretch Mode to Canvas Items or Viewport.

The full documentation can be read [here](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/rendering/multiple_resolutions.html)


## Physics

First, let me address the elephant in the room: Godot's physics is a bit fucky.
It's a "in-house" built engine, [whose original developer has since left godot from before Godot 4](https://www.reddit.com/r/godot/comments/16p90a1/godot_4_default_physics_engine_is_a_complete_mess/).
There has been talk for years to have official support for [Jolt](https://github.com/jrouwe/JoltPhysics) [(1)](https://github.com/godotengine/godot-proposals/discussions/5161) [(2)](https://github.com/godotengine/godot-proposals/issues/7308) [(3)](https://forum.godotengine.org/t/is-there-a-physics-engine-white-paper/82513).
However, at the current time, there only exists the [Godot Jolt Plugin](https://github.com/godot-jolt/godot-jolt).

Now, to be clear, most engines have massive drawbacks in their systems.
Unreal Engine 4 has massive light bleed issues, Unity has had massive physics passthrough issues for decades, etc etc etc...
As such, I draw attention to these issues more to present ways to work with the limitations given,
not to complain or say how things should be improved, like many, many others due.

The key to being a good developer, and more importantly for an engineer, is to work within the constraints you are given.

If you cannot work within the constraints given to you, then mald, seeth, and cope.

### [Physics Layers and Masks](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/4.3/tutorials/physics/physics_introduction.html#collision-layers-and-masks)
This is an incredibly powerful system.

To summarize:
- Layer: where the entity exists
- Mask: where the entity scans

### Detect overlap without colliding
[Check this post](https://forum.godotengine.org/t/how-to-not-collide-physically-but-still-detect-collision/15648/2)

You can't just use raw physics bodies : no amount of masking and layering fenagling will work.
If RigidBodies or CharacterBodies are on the same mask / layer, they will collide.
You will need an Area node to detect overlap.

### 2D floating physics for CharacterBody
May not be the most obvious thing, but 2D physics actually has two modes: top-down / orthographic and side

If you have a on-side game, you should use grounded Motion Mode on your

If you have a top-down game, you should use floating
If you don't do this, your CharacterBodies may get stuck on each other


## Patterns
### Movement effect zones for CharacterBody

Godot's damping functionalities are a little strange.
The documentation isn't clear, and you mostly have to go about it with trial and error to find appropriate damping values.
Some people do have [other implementations](https://www.reddit.com/r/godot/comments/rtss7u/a_function_for_calculating_rigidbody2d_damping/), and there are [discussions on the topic](https://github.com/godotengine/godot-proposals/discussions/9315), but unless you have some major constraint, it's better to work with what you've got.

According to the documentation for CharacterBody2D: ["They are not affected by physics at all, but they affect other physics bodies in their path"](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/classes/class_characterbody2d.html).
This may entice people to use RigidBodies, which are much harder to deal with.
However, I'm generally not a fan of RigidBodies: full physics where you generally do not need it and a lot more work.

A very easy solution is to still use Area2Ds : make sure to check the [docs](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/classes/class_area2d.html) and the [tutorial](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/physics/using_area_2d.html).

Usually, when working with `CharacterBody2D`s, you will have an attached script with a defined speed variable that the character moves at.
For example, take the code below:

```
extends CharacterBody2D

@export var speed = 300.0

func _physics_process(delta: float) -> void:
	var input_direction = Input.get_vector("left", "right", "up", "down")
	velocity = input_direction * speed

	move_and_slide()
```

This is very simple: modify the `velocity` property of the `CharacterBody2D`, which is used by the `move_and_slide()` function to move the character.

However, we're not going to rely solely on CharacterBody2D here.
As described above in [Detect overlap without colliding](#Detect overlap without colliding), we will need an `Area2D` node attached to our character to detect other Area2Ds.
This is because `CharacterBody2D` does not have the same signals available as something like `RigidBody2D`, notably `body_shape_entered` and `body_shape_exited`.

Attach an `Area2D` node with the desired `CollisionShape2D`. You should have the following structure:

	CharacterBody2D
	├── CollisionShape2D
	└── Area2D
		└── CollisionShape2D



Then, connect the `area_entered` and `area_exited` signals of the `Area2D` node to your `CharacterBody2D` script, and add the following code:

```
func _on_area_2d_area_entered(area: Area2D) -> void:
	if area.linear_damp:
		speed *= 1 - (area.linear_damp / 100)

func _on_area_2d_area_exited(area: Area2D) -> void:
	if area.linear_damp:
		speed = speed / (1 - (area.linear_damp / 100))
```

Now, whenever your character enters an `Area2D` with a `linear_damp` space override, your character will slow down (and return to it's normal speed when it exits).

You can do something almost identical for angular damp and gravity overrides

#### Limitations
This doesn't take into consideration the Space Override type, and behaves like Combine.
However, it would be easy to have a map, where the Key is the RID of the Area2Ds that are currently in, to then 

I will not be going that far though, as my use case doesn't have such requirements.

There will most likely lead to floating-point errors in the long run.
The previous suggestion to use a Map of effects could be combined with a base speed variable.
Then, whenever an area is added or removed, the base speed would have all the multipliers applied.


### Effects & DOT (damage over time)
The simplest approach is to use timers, as seen [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZliG9mX8f1w&ab_channel=DevDrache).

When the timer emits, make whatever effect take place, and check if the effect should delete itself.

For areas with DOT effects, you can get away with something better:
When a player enters, you can potentially make the effect take place on enter.
Then, the area itself holds the only timer, then applying the effect to all the entities within itself.
This results in handling much fewer timers for a similar effect.
